---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: My Journey With JavaScript
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2022-01-19
labels:
  - Javascript
---

As a current college student still learning the roots of coding, I was quite spooked upon hearing that we’d need to learn yet another programming language. Prior to JavaScript, I’ve coded primarily in Java, and dabbled in Python and a little C++. The characters in “Java” make up almost half that of “JavaScript”, so how different could the two be?

## First Impressions of JavaScript

So far, JavaScript feels simple. I don’t mean simple in an “easy” way, but rather the syntax, specifically the variable declarations, don’t need as much definition as the same code in Java. Another noticeable difference between the two is defining functions. For Java, there were specific variable types for input and output, and both of those had to be in the function header along with the type of function we were defining. In JavaScript, you don’t even need to put a specific input type. Assigning and declaring variables that I initially thought would take at least a few lines of code were simplified down to one long line. Learning ES6 had me writing arrows (=>) and ellipses when I had never used anything like that before in coding. There were multiple times where I wondered how such syntax could even work, only to find out it worked exactly as I thought it would. Compared to Java where everything is defined and exact, JavaScript feels like the cooler, more relaxed sibling that works similarly in a different way.

## JavaScript In The Future

It’s hard to say if I think JavaScript is a good or bad language right now, as I probably have less than 10 hours of coding experience with it. Based on the numbers, JavaScript is undeniably one of the most important programming languages. I see both benefits and drawbacks from JavaScript. Its simplicity is very smooth and handy. There’s no need to deal with incorrect return types and improper assignments. JavaScript just goes with the flow, and that’s where the drawbacks come from. Although there are nice, clean ways to simplify code, it sometimes gets too liberating. In Java, you’ll see if you can’t return a certain value. You’ll also see what specific kind of value you should be returning for a function. There’s errors and clear directions. JavaScript’s freedom allows a lot more stuff to slide through the tracks, wrong code included. Using a var instead of a let will probably still run your code with no errors, but it might be a different output than expected. It’s a tradeoff between simplicity and specificity. 

## ICS 314 & Athletic Software Engineering (ASE)

The format of ICS 314 and its athletic software approach is new for me, and I like it (so far). Other classes usually involve a TA lecturing through a lab and students replicating the thought process. ASE requires more attention, and that forces your brain to focus on the important concepts. Having timed coding problems (WODs, workout of the day) is stressful, and I know they’re only going to get harder. Something about being under a little bit of pressure helps my brain process information faster, and the challenge aspect makes me think the problem out better. There’s also a very rewarding sense of completion upon running code and seeing that it works. It is still early to say if the WODs will stick with me, but I definitely prefer them over typical assignments. In a nutshell, JavaScript and learning about athletic software engineering is a lot. I’ve learned a bit already, and I expect to learn a lot more in the near future. 
